good morning everybody
thanks for being here bright and early
i'm dave kellogg and today we're going
to talk really
about understanding sas businesses in
general how to think about them
how to value them we're going to do that
through the lens of sas metrics
and today with a particular focus on
understanding the
healthiness of the install base of a sas
company so that's going to
quickly bring us to talking about churn
a topic about which i've blogged a lot
um and to net dollar retention which i
think is actually a more effective way
to get at what churn is trying to
measure so uh let's jump in
quick introduction about me uh so first
who is this guy so i've been a ceo
of sas startups for over 10 years at two
different companies
i took host analytics from 8 million in
arr to 50 million
and mark logic from 0 to 80 million uh
in addition to that i have 10 years as a
cmo
at two different companies uh one versus
where we went from one to fifteen
and business objects where he had kind
of an epic run from 30 million
to over a billion in revenue uh not
valuation revenue the old-fashioned
thing
uh and then ten combined years on five
different boards aster data and granular
and three other boards today elation
noxio and prophecy
i'm also an advisor and angel investor
works a lot of companies and that's just
a sample
and i'm also a blogger which we'll talk
more about in a minute so
you know so that's who i am why do i
care about this topic
well it's a two-line proof which is
metrics are key to fundraising and
fundraising is key to success
right any further questions and
certainly now
you know in today's silicon valley and
this has changed over the last 20 years
today silicon valley now more than ever
right the ability to raise money is what
separates the winners
from the runners-up and and the losers
so
in the formula you know this is not a
race you know vc back sass is not a race
or a strong kick at the finish you know
like a quarter mile
wins the race in my opinion it's a race
where you get in first
early um by by driving high growth with
the right unit economics
and if you've done that if you're a
leader with good growth at the right
unit economics
you can then raise lots of capital and
you set up a virtuous cycle right
the more capital you raise the faster
you grow the faster you grow
with the right unit economics comma the
more capital you can raise
so that's the name of the game that's
why this matters so much
um you know the other reasons i care
about it are one it's a big impact on
valuation and ergo dilution
second i'm a huge believer in really
trying to understand the guts or the
drivers of a sas business
and looking at sas metrics helps you do
that i think every ceo should have a
driver-based model
where you play with sales productivity
sales turnover sales ramp time
marketing is a percent of sales cost per
cell you put these various drivers in
and you can see what happens to your
business see their impact
and to understand driver based models
you want to understand sas metrics
and finally the last point is more of a
pet peeve i loathe the general
lack of rigor i see when some people
discuss sas metrics
where they talk about metrics without
defining them or without knowing what
they're counting
and there's a lot of that that happens
when we get down to churn so so part of
this is if we're going to look at these
metrics
let's make sure we understand how you're
supposed to calculate them how people
game them um and how they're supposed to
work
um so onward so that's kind of the intro
um i do blog a lot about this stuff
uh my blog's at kellogg.com and
some of the topics i cover are sas
businesses in general kind of all
aspects of sas businesses particular
emphasis on sas metrics
strategy sales marketing which is my
background
uh and more so if you have a chance if
you like the material today
swing on over to cal blog and take a
look
among other things i'll be posting the
slides to this presentation there
so we have three topics today uh the
first is
understanding a sas business uh and
we're gonna talk about why it's hard to
understand the sas business
we're gonna talk about how to think
about a sas business um
and then we're gonna talk about kind of
basic unit economics
um second section we're gonna talk about
the trouble with churn
um because it turns out much as i love
churn i
increasingly am kind of skeptical when
companies talk about churn rates
and we'll talk about the three problems
i see with churn rates
that kind of undermine it as a good
metric
and by the way churn rates are used in
other calculations so if churn gets
polluted so do the downstream metrics
from churn
which is another problem we'll talk
about um and by the way even the concept
of
churn itself can be a little bit elusive
so so we'll talk about that in that
second
section the trouble with churn and then
finally long live you know king is dead
along with the king
uh long long-lived net dollar retention
we'll talk about this this is actually
more of a public company sas metric than
a private company sas metric
and this is kind of in my mind the rare
case where the public company sas metric
is better
than the private company sas metric so
for those of us who have spent all our
time in the private world
i'll introduce you to what net dollar
retention is then we'll talk about it as
a valuation driver
uh we'll talk about how to calculate it
we'll talk about how to game it it too
is gameable um and then we'll talk about
kind of a new twist on it which is how
to manage it uh and then as kind of a
preview we'll end
by talking about um the metric i see
coming after it
uh there's a request to the chat for uh
defining churn which i'll get to i'm
gonna try and keep one eye on the chat
it's hard to be honest
i got three monitors up um i'll define
chern uh in a second
in short it's arr that leaks out of your
bucket uh and that will mean more in
just a minute than it did right now
so that's what we're going to talk about
but first let's just go look at the
profit and loss statement we'll start
here
uh and this you know they say the
average american family has 2.5 children
right like there is no
actual average american family this is
the average sas company for each of
these lines
i took the median off meritek and they
have a great
kind of public comparables website on
their website microsite on their website
and i took the median company so this is
the median revenue the median cogs the
medium gross profit
and i just laid it out into a p l so
this is many ways comes the typical
public sas company by the way it
actually looks a fair bit like alteryx
not in all respects altera says better
gross margins
and other things but if you had to say
who was closest to this kind of just
eyeballing it in the data set
it's not miles away from alteryx but in
any case this is
not alteryx this is the typical medium
sas company
uh and the answer of where customer
success fits into the p l is uh sales
and marketing by the way
uh good question so i'm trying to keep
one eye on that but in any case
the reason it's hard to understand the
sas business when you look at the p
l there's kind of there's actually two
different reasons there's well called
the usual suspects here
and then the next slide we'll talk about
the more conceptual reason but the usual
suspects are first the public companies
don't disclose arr any recurring revenue
right they don't disclose it
uh an arr is your subscription base how
many people are signed up if you will
revenue is basically a math problem
right if you know arr
then you revenue is simply a calculation
and it is a lagging indicator not a
leading indicator
which is why financial analysts don't
really look at revenue as much
they look at billings quote unquote and
billings is a public company sas metric
it's revenue plus change in deferred
revenue
and it's a way to try and impute what
bookings are
but they aren't released i.e new sales
don't get released so you have to kind
of triangulate on it
arr needs to be implied in the same way
churn is typically not disclosed
so you really as a public company
investor are getting fairly
limited visibility into the core engine
driving a sas business
now if you think about it it's kind of a
one-way transformation which is
given arr i can in a deterministic way
calculate a p l given a p l it's
non-deterministic to get arr
right i can come up with an infinite
number of solutions that will generate
that piano maybe not infinite but i can
come up with a lot of different
solutions that will generate the same p
l so it is tricky to interpret public
companies sas metrics in fact i once
met ironically a public company cfo who
didn't actually understand sas unit
economics
because public company investors can't
see them so
crazy stuff the other problem with
trying to understand a sas business is
it's actually two businesses um you have
this overall business that has 465
million dollars in revenue
and it's composed of two very different
businesses one the recurring business
all those existing customers who
hopefully renew every year
right and every year give you revenue
we'll call that the recurring business
and next to that is a other business
called a customer acquisition business
which is out
getting customers and and look i'll walk
down the p
l let's just assume it costs the same to
serve either type of customer so 23
cost of goods sold so each business has
a 77
gross margin now that that's where the
similarity kind of
ends if we look you could argue that 100
of sales and marketing in a sas company
is to get new customers
it's not entirely true somewhere
typically around 10 percent might be the
cost of customer success
to keep those existing customers but but
just to make the math simple
um i put all of sales marketing into
this business that's out getting new
customers and none
into the business that's recurring right
keep the math simple i split r d i just
said
half of r d is to keep existing
customers happy and renewing
half is to put in you know shiny new
features that attract new customers
um i split gna on a similar basis
probably should prorated it by revenue
didn't do it
but i i just put g a 50 50. um and when
you do this exercise what pops out
is you see that a sas business is kind
of a weighted average
of this incredibly profitable recurring
business with 55
operating margins and this incredibly
unprofitable customer acquisition
business
now the good news about the business on
the right is that it is feeding people
to the business
on the left right and in many ways you
know in order to make things simple i
tend to be very black and white and kind
of do dichotomies right just like
putting all of sales and marketing into
the new business business
the other way to think about this is
private equity cares a lot about the
middle column the recurring business
right and lenders who lend to private
equity care a lot about that because
that's the annuity portion of a sas
business
and venture capitalists care a lot about
the right side right because
they want to know how fast you can grow
this thing and how efficiently you can
add new customers
now in the dark recesses of virtually
every board member's mind
at one point or another somebody thought
look at what happens when you turn off
sales and marketing
gosh i have this incredibly profitable
recurring business
right and obviously you can't do that as
mentioned you need some sales and
marketing to keep the repairing business
going
and and then you'll well in effect
you'll stop growing but will you right
that's what net dollar retention is
actually measuring what happens to this
business if you kind of just
leave it alone right and and the fantasy
and it is a fantasy is what if it grew
all by itself
right that recurring business if it
could just grow if i could get rid of
that other business
how much is that recurring business
worth and the answer is of course as
mentioned twice already
it doesn't grow all by itself i'm
oversimplifying to make the point clear
but by the way it does grow at 40 of the
cost of new logo customer acquisition
if you look at the customer acquisition
cost ratio
for example in the key bank survey that
i'm citing down below
you'll see that the expansion cac or the
customer acquisition cost of expansion
arr
is about 40 i.e less than half
of the cost of new logo arr so this
thing doesn't grow all by itself but
gosh it certainly does grow a lot
cheaper
than that very expensive new customer
acquisition business
now let's go back to private company
land
because i started us in public company
land with the kind of average public sas
company but look in in private company
land which is where
most of the people i think on this call
come from
um we get to see the underlying sas
engine and now for the person who asked
about the definition
here's what i call the sas leaky bucket
which is i think of a sas company
as a leaky bucket full of arr right
every quarter sales dumps more water in
uh every quarter customer success tries
to minimize
the leakage out right so we start with a
certain amount of ar
3.9 million in this case in 2q of 19 we
added 525k of new arr
of which 400 was new logo 125 was
expansion
right so new arr comes in two basic
flavors right from new customers
or from existing customers and then
despite their valiant efforts
a hundred units of ar leaked out of the
bucket
um therefore leaving us with 4.3 million
in ending arr
right and you could just keep running
that thing every quarter
obviously ending arr in one quarter is
starting a r the next
um and you could get some good metrics
just off this right like how fast
is your ending arr growing year over
year
in fact if you only had two numbers to
give you the value of a sas company
it would be ending arr and growth rate i
could then tell you roughly what that
company is worth
kind of a first order evaluation another
interesting metric is net new arr
so if you subtract the churn from all of
the new arr how much did the water level
in the bucket change
there's a lot of ways to look at
expansion one simple way it's just
expansion as a percent of new arr
people don't talk about this enough i
think it's a real simple to understand
metric
to me when it's less than 20 maybe
you're not exploiting your expansion
opportunity
much as much as you should be when it's
over 40
uh maybe you're not getting as much new
logo as you should be right so
so i personally like it running in the
20s and 30s um
and then there's net expansion which is
kind of all in uh
if we uh not all that if we take new er
sorry if we take expansion er minus
churn arr
what do you have left so that's kind of
your net expansion of the pool and you
can see this company is not doing
particularly well on that metric
and went up 25k ie expansion offset
churned by 25k into q19 but then
it immediately went negative and offset
the increase of 3q19 so so this company
is actually struggling with that for
that metric
but anyway once you're looking inside of
sas companies
uh kind of leaky bucket and you can see
the the arr
engine as i might call it you can then
calculate
these kind of core sas unit economics
metrics so uh yeah new logo to me
uh is is a lot of different terms for it
some people call it net new which i
don't like
to me when you get arr you either get it
from a new logo
i.e someone who's not an existing
customer or you get it from an existing
customer so new arr
from a somebody you're not doing
business with is what i'll call new logo
arr
i'll some people call it new biz arr
some people call it net new arr but i
think it's misleading
um and when you get arr like if you if
you were an existing customer paying me
100 units and you expanded your contract
to 120
uh that would be expansion arr sometimes
called upsell
and there are fine distinctions between
those terms but the gross motto
that's a good set of definitions so
probably
my favorite sas metric is the customer
acquisition cost ratio
which is how much are you spending to
put a dollar of ar
in that bucket right so it's last period
sales and marketing expense divided by
this period's new arr
for sas metrics nuts that's actually the
inverse of the magic number which
scale ventures uh came up with uh i
prefer it
in this form um because it's more
intuitive to me to say how much did a
dollar of arr
cost me so i like the cac ratio uh very
important sas metric
you know typically runs around 1.3 you
know below 1.3 is getting to be quite
good below one is really good
best i've ever seen was point four um
anything between one point five and two
people start to scratch their eyebrows
above two people get nervous above three
people won't talk to you roughly
so um lifetime value uh is
one over the churn rate and this is
actually customer lifetime i made a
mistake on the slides it's a little
confusing but but the lifetime value is
basically the arr per year
times the lifetime and but the lifetime
is one over the churn rate so if you
have a ten percent churn rate we would
say your average customer lifetime is
ten years
um now this is where it gets interesting
um
because there's this notion of well wait
a minute you know is a kaka of two too
high
right if i'm spending two dollars to get
a dollar of ar is that really too much
it's on the high side compared to
averages but for my business is it too
high and to answer that question the
best way to do so is say wait a minute
you paid two dollars for something
what's it worth right if you have a very
high churn rate just so you have 50
churn rate it's a terrible deal right
because you you paid two dollars
to get a dollar and a half right because
they went one year and half of them
churned you only got a dollar and a half
back so that's not good
um but say you have a 10 year ltv well
gosh if i have a cac ratio of two and a
10-year ltv
then my ltv to cac is five and that's
pretty good i'm getting back five times
what i
paid which helps pay for all those other
expenses right like r d and g and
everything else so
so ltv to cac for me for a long time was
kind of the ultimate sas metric
like this is it this is the one that
kind of explains everything it's kind of
a balanced scale
between how much you're paying for cac
versus how much you're getting back in
ltv
right and conversely by the way if you
have a really low cac great but if you
have a very high churn
well great you can acquire customers
return after a year very cheaply who
cares
right it's not a great business so
another metric
which is very popular and i mentioned it
here because vcs look at it a lot is cac
payback period
and this is kind of my unique way of
calculating it it produces the same
answer
but if you just take your cac ratio and
divide it by subscription gross margin
you get in years the cac payback period
what does that mean
if your cac is two i.e you're spending
two dollars to acquire
uh well let's say your cac is 1.5 make
the math easy you're spending
uh 1.5 to acquire a dollar of arr
and your subscription gross margins are
75.75 75
then that means you get paid back your
cac
in two years right 1.5 divided by 0.75
is 2.
so how many years of gross profit does
it take to pay back the sales and
marketing costs
of acquisition a lot of people love this
metric you know vcs in general kind of
like
all-in-one metrics because they're
trying to make an investment decision
i always feel like operators don't love
these metrics as much because if it's
too high i don't know which side of it
is broken
right if my payback period is too long
is it because my cat's too high or my
subscription margin is too low
and as an operator i want to go fix it
so in some ways operators look at sas
metrics a little bit differently
uh than investors so you think we're
good hey we just did sas unit economics
101.
um that's the we looked at the public
company view of a sas company
we looked at the private company view we
examined really what are the core key
metrics the leaky bucket
cac lt vitacak churn we're good right
well no not so fast uh increasingly
over the last several years i personally
and i've blogged a lot about churn
i've become increasingly skeptical about
churn rates um
and i almost entitled this section kind
of tongue-in-cheek
why private equity firms recalculate all
your metrics
because people play games sometimes with
their sas metrics and in the vc
side frankly i don't see as much
recalculation but when you meet pe
people
they will literally take all your
financials and just recalculate
everything
you know you're gonna say your churn is
you know only ten percent they're like
well we'll figure out what your term
rate is
just give us uh the data and we'll
calculate all the metrics right and and
the reasons we're going to talk about in
here are some of the reasons why so
so turn in my mind has kind of three
fatal flaws or not fatal but you know
in reality look the title of the speech
is somewhat dramatized i wouldn't say
sharon is quite dead
i would say sharon is wounded and the
problems with churn
are threefold uh first there's too many
darn ways to calculate churn
um and that makes it ambiguous which one
are you talking about when you tell me a
churn rate
and and by the way you know it could
easily double the number and any number
that if you don't know how it's defined
is off by a factor of two
it's kind of a big deal so it's a little
bit too gameable it's a little bit too
misunderstood
second churn is used in downstream
metrics like ltv to cac
it's implicitly in there and
unfortunately if you pollute churn you
pollute everything downstream
of churn so in my mind churned in flicks
kind of collateral damage
on ltv uh there's the question of in a
sas company what goes into cogs to
compute gross margin on the last slide
the answer of cogs in his subscription
cogs to the sas company is the cost of
running the service
so in the old days if you had a data
center you'd have all your data center
costs and your tech ops cost in there
in the modern days it'll be the check
you write to amazon and all likelihood
uh for actual and the people you have in
the check to amazon for running your sas
service
um let me just see there's a couple
other questions up here
there's a lot of questions about new
logo i think we got that one covered
right
um the new logo is somebody you haven't
done business with before
uh do i recommend a reporting system
we'll come back to that so in any case
back
back here to the to the content off the
q a um churning flex collateral damage
on downstream metrics and finally
churn if you get into the details there
is kind of a dark
rabbit hole of offsets and timing that
even makes churn ar that one number
forget rates just churn ar itself a tad
ambiguous um and let's jump in i'll
explain what i mean by each of these
so problem one number one is there's
actually at least
four ways to calculate churn rates you
can either say before expansion or
after so if i had 100 units of ar in my
bucket
and 10 units leaked out from people who
didn't renew
and 15 units of expansion happened did i
have
10 units of churn or did i have negative
five units of turn
right am i looking at churn before
expansion or after
gross churn is before expansion net
churn is after
and sometimes people reverse those two
terms it's not that uncommon
um so another confusion factor in churn
what does that mean
um is it net of or net uh but in any
case by definition gross is what leaked
out of the bucket
net is what leaked out of the bucket
offset by expansion
right so you have which one are we
talking about so that's the numerator
and then in the denominator we have well
what are we dividing this by
churn as compared to what either the two
most
common flavors are one the entire arr
base
right my whole subscription base or my
available to renew base now how could
those be different you might ask well
the answer is multi-year contracts
right just say you do only two-year
contracts
if you have a ar base of 100 units only
50 comes up for renewal every year
right if you do three-year contracts
only a third of it comes up
every year if you do a blended average
as i did at my last company of one two
three and the occasional five-year
contract
some blended average of those contract
durations
come up every year for renewal so so so
this is a huge swing factor on churn and
it's
it's hard to argue which is right or
rich is wrong if you're kind of trying
to value the annuity as a financial
person
i guess you should get the benefit of
this multi-year con contract so let's
divide by 100 instead of dividing by 50
because mathematically they can't get
out of those contracts if you have a
history of renewing them and people not
breaking out
then in reality that that's kind of the
true churn rate
but on the other hand if you're trying
to understand the health of your
business
you know if 10 units leaked out against
100 that's 10 percent not bad
if 10 units leaked out against 50
because only half the base is up for
renewal
20 i'm getting pretty nervous i don't
know about you
so the issue is you make the matrix you
have four different ways of calculating
this metric and to me it's a huge
problem
and people often try to dress up one is
the other they'll kind of deliberately
confuse net and gross they'll
deliberately confuse
uh arr with atr and you know obviously
the most favorable metric
is net is number four the one and by the
way i've ranked them in order of if i
could only see one i'd want to see gross
atr
if i could only see two i'd want to see
gross and net etr
if i can see three i'd want to see the
same order on arr based churn rates
so so you know my kind of quip
on this is you know other than not
knowing what the numerator is and not
nobody know what the denominator is it's
a great ratio right so
so there's a problem to me with churn
rates you can argue this is not a lethal
problem pe firms will just go
recalculate this for you
a rigorous vc will kind of grill you to
make sure you're actually telling them
what uh you know
they understand which box they're in
when you answer but
that's only the first problem uh let's
talk about the second problem
um the second problem is we alluded to
uh and there's really kind of two
problems in here
is that churn blows up stuff downstream
uh downstream so to the extent that
churn is now less meaningful than we'd
like it to be
now ltv is less meaningful right or
lifetime really it's not uh
this is where i made that same mistake
again it's really the customer lifetime
uh which
affects ltv uh is now blown up as well
right so if your churn rate is ten
percent one over ten is ten year
lifetime oops just kidding it was
actually 20.
oh now it's a five-year lifetime so so
this metric is now polluted by the
pollution inherent in churn
so four different churn rates means you
effectively have four different ltvs so
that's the first problem
um the the second problem is that very
low churn rates break a lot of these
ratios if you have negative
churn right you know net churn that's
negative
you expand more than you uh shrink then
you have infinite ltv
well i don't like that i mean i don't
like a key metric that breaks when
you're in a desirable
condition because you want to have
negative churn so i don't want to know
how negative
and now the metric's broken because i
can't measure it so that's not very
encouraging
the other problem is more of a math
problem is when churn rates are very low
a lot of it ends up heavily in the
future you get a very high
you know very long lifetime and a very
high lifetime value but like half the
lifetime values after year 10 right or
after year 25
um and look a four-year-old company
talking about a 25-year customer
lifetime does make me at least
uncomfortable right
right like how credible is that so you
say your customer lifetime is
six times longer than you existed um so
so that's a little dubious
the other problem uh with these very low
churn rates is you get these very
long lifetimes so either you have the
heavily future weighted problem or you
have the arbitrary
cap uh problem so one time i was working
with a banker to sell my last company
and i saw them calculating ltv and i saw
that formula
in the spreadsheet and i'm like what are
you doing and the answer is well
because of the long lifetime problem if
the churn gets too low the lifetimes get
too high so i'm going to cap it at 10
years
so we're going to calculate it and we'll
take the minimum of 10 years in the
calculated value
and as soon as i see that kind of stuff
around a sas metric it just makes me
super uncomfortable right
because now i have four different churn
rates i have the
low churn problem and the super long ltv
problem and now i'm inserting an
arbitrary cap kind of silently
and it's just making me very skeptical
and by the way as mentioned if we've
blown up
lifetime value we've then blown up
lifetime value to cac
so the metric that i once blogged as
being the ultimate sas metric
is now kind of polluted as well because
all these downstream problems coming
from churn
now um let me just take a quick so
uh problem number three churn a r itself
can be non-obvious so this is really in
the detail so i'm not gonna spend too
much time here
but there are timing issues on
calculating churn i'll just give you a
couple examples
say somebody at renewal time drops 30
units of product a
and adds 40 units of product b do we
count that as 30 units of churn and 40
of upsell
right which is going to drive up my
churn rate and my expansion rates
potentially not net expansion but
my upsell is percent of new er will go
up right
do i look at it that way or do i look at
it as just 10 units of upsell
uh and and i wouldn't agonize over this
one too much because as it turns out
most people most finance and ops people
this is not a hard question they just go
that's 10 units of upsell
now if i'm a product manager i sure as
heck would like to know which products
are losing customers in which are
gaining customers
so the product management perspective on
this might be different but the finance
perspective is what i call account level
churn hey
we care about this customer they went up
by 10 discounts of 10 units of expansion
and effectively that 30 units of what
some people call product churn is
effectively invisible
because it's been completely offset so
in any case that that's one problem
um which is at renewal time how do we
offset shrinkage and expansion not that
hard but it makes chern er a little
ambiguous
the other problem is what i call upsell
along the way which is somebody
starts out at 100 units six months later
they expand to 140
and they renew at 130. and the question
is gosh is this 30 units
of expansion or is this 40 units of
expansion and 10 units of churn
uh how do i count that and look the
company itself i'm going to argue is
schizophrenic
because when you're making the
fundraising deck right you want to call
this 30 units of upsell
or expansion but when you're doing csm
comp plans
you want to say darn it mr and mrs csm
you lost 10 units on that contract you
couldn't renew it at full value
so so i'd argue the company itself even
gets a little bit confused
um and then finally we'll talk about
this more at the end but built-in
expansion
so just say you sign a deal where it's a
three-year contract hundred and year one
120 year two 140
in year three if you're going to think
about like ltv to
calculations um this is more of a cat
thing than a churn thing um
but how what's the cat how much arr
did we acquire for that sales and
marketing cost did we require
some might argue 360 units well that's
not a orr
we got 360 units of revenue but but of
are we got 100 units the initial arr
and then we count it as 20 units of
expansion in year two and year three
or do we flatten it out and say it's 120
across three years or if you want to be
aggressive do you say no we acquired 140
units of ar we just haven't realized it
yet
so which is it do it terminal ar average
ar initial ar if i'm doing ltv to cac i
need to know the answer to that
so look as was once said about cash and
profit there's a semi-famous quote that
but cash is a fact profit is an opinion
uh i feel the same way about ar
insurance
that ar is a fact uh churn and churn
rates are an opinion
so um and that's what makes me
uncomfortable with churn and that's why
i was kind of thinking how can we solve
this problem because
it's just so detailed few people really
want to talk about the four ways to
calculate it the four different ltvs the
timing and offsets
i mean all that stuff kind of just you
know bores people
confuses people so how do we try and
answer the question that we're trying to
answer which is how healthy
is your installed base uh without just
getting kind of sucked into the weeds
and the answer is to zoom out not in
right and i have one word for you
cohorts right so let's talk about
uh net dollar retention so net
our retention actually i'm going to just
take a quick look at the q a here
uh so how does uncontrollable turn
versus controllable churn fit into this
i mean first
that's a great question those terms are
super undefined
in my mind right and even then i think
like what's the example
uh the example of my last company would
be that oh they got a new cfo
and they churned or worse yet they got
acquired and then churned so we're going
to call that uncontrollable
right we couldn't control that so we
shouldn't really count that kind of
churn
but the issue is it's not that simple
right because let's just say the reality
was
they bought the solution they were not
super happy with it got acquired and
then churned
oh that's quite different now isn't it
because if they were super happy with it
maybe they would have fought to the
death to keep the system
rather than just use the system the
parent company told them to use and
maybe that would have worked or maybe it
wouldn't have
so to me controllable versus
uncontrollable churn it is a concept
people talk a lot about
but but i get super uncomfortable
because i think it could easily be a
cop-out
right you know what like my last company
they got a new cfo and they didn't renew
we can blame the two cfo but if the new
cfo asked the head of finance
how they like the solution and that
person was only lukewarm
the new cfo would say gosh just use my
system then i've got a great one
right so i'm i'm skeptical on the notion
of uncontrollable churn
um do i care more about logo churn or ar
churn i tend to look at sas businesses
through an
arr lens um and i do that because
partially because the last sas business
i ran was bimodal we had a corporate
sales channel that had a 25k
ar asp and we had a field sales that had
a 75k
ar asp and and therefore
if you looked at things like customer
counts they weren't that meaningful
because we actually had
almost no average customers right there
there were no 50k err
customers so because in my mind the more
your customers all look the same
the more you can just look at counts
right just counting the number of people
who churned
as opposed to looking at the arr that
churned the more your business is
two three different businesses all in
one right the more to me you need to
nettle all out and just look at ar
um so i don't do a lot of count based
metrics but a lot of people do they'll
define churn as
we had 100 customers 90 renewed
therefore churn is ten percent
i i greatly prefer to look at archer so
thank you for asking that
yeah usage based pricing and sas with
seasonality that's a tough question if
we have time we'll come back to it
at the end um where do you put the cost
of retention support customer success et
cetera so
you're right i left customer support out
of cogs they do belong in cogs
customer success in my opinion does not
belong in cogs
it belongs in sales um and most
companies will put customer success in
sales i have seen
on occasion people put customer success
into cogs
and the argument for that is if it's
really a set of services to kind of keep
you and get you
up and running it's a cost of running
the service uh if it's really about
renewing contracts it should be in sales
in my mind some might argue g
a and if it's about trying to drive up
sell and expansion then it definitely
belongs in sales
which well i won't go to the next level
on that so
uh let me just go back to q a do i see
anything else here
oh darn i was looking only at the top of
the q a i'm sorry uh
what about customer support we got that
one long term contract
what goes into acquisition versus
recurring yeah
so the question let me answer that one
if you do a five-year contract for 100
units of ar
and i had that split sas business um
where does the revenue go and the answer
is in year one it would go in the
right-hand column
and in years two three four five it
would go into the center column the
recurring business
uh that's where the revenue goes the the
more interesting question uh
randy is where's the cac go
how much especially if that contract's
expanding
if i take that sales marketing cost to
acquire that arr
am i dividing it by the tcv am i
dividing it by the starting ar the
average ar the terminal arr by the way
the sales comp plan
what do you want to incent your sales
force to do is all tied up in that
so uh let me just go down here sorry the
q and a have been
at the top of it uh so
good good good how do you factor mid
contract churn versus contract renewal
yeah oh wow you have mid-contract churn
well at first that's not a good sign in
my line
i've seen very little of it frankly i've
always surprised that you don't see
more cancellations of multi-year
contracts like you sign a three-year
contract
and people they kind of just assume it's
going to renew every year and i'm like
well
just because they signed the contract if
they're really unhappy with the system
you may not
get that you know it's not a renewal
it's a payment but you may not get that
payment
in year two and maybe in fact if you
want to optimize getting that payment
you might be better off treating it like
a renewal even though it isn't
so um now mid-contract churn means
somebody's pretty unhappy
and the question is look if uh let me
pick the
i think that's what you're hitting on
say it was a three-year contract and
they decided to stop paying in years two
and three
uh first you could sue them if you want
to right a contract is a contract
i don't recommend suing customers as it
is a great strategy
but technically speaking a contract is a
contract and if you're seeing a lot of
that to me there's a big problem
uh because frankly uh i've seen very
little of it
and and i've worked with some companies
where there are kind of serious product
issues people are not that happy but
they're still paying
so um but the short answer is it's not
churn it's actually well what is it let
me think about that so somebody refuses
to renew it wasn't upfront
it's a great question right because it's
not in the atr base
right uh so it won't show up in atr is
because you're going to have 100 units
of churn that was you know it's in the
numerator but it's not in the
denominator
um technically speaking it's actually
bad debt
right but but you should take it out of
the ar pool so so personally i would
probably put it in adjustments i mean
just to be clear
this is now the like the advanced level
but in that leaky bucket i have one
other row called adjustments
and i would put that into an adjustment
it's
i might put in deterrent i need to think
more about that i'd probably just put
that one to term but goes to adjustments
is like currency
like just say you have some of your r
and euros and some of it's in dollars
and the size of the pool changed due to
the currency rate changing
that would definitely be an adjustment
in the leaky bucket i guess
now i'm convinced yours would actually
be churned uh and i would count it in
the period in which it occurred
and if i had much of it i'd be very
concerned quite frankly because
um to a certain extent i'd also stop
doing multi-year deals because if you're
giving someone a price lock for a
multi-year deal and they're not renewing
you you gave something and got nothing
so anyway let's uh come off the q and a
back to the uh
back to our regularly scheduled content
here uh so look
this problem trying to figure out how
healthy the installed base is
is a great problem for cohort analysis
where we just step back
rather than stepping in because you step
in it's quicksand
we step back and say let's just grab a
cohort typically all customers
what were they worth one time period ago
let's just say a year ago
and now what are they worth today now
that's net dollar retention today's
value
of their arr right in arr there's some
questions of that it's just annual
recurring revenue
if you agree to pay me a hundred units a
year for to use my service your arr
value is a hundred
um so what were they worth a year ago
what are they worth now and the beauty
of this metric is three things one it's
easy to calculate
it's easy to understand and it's hard to
game
and that's my biggest problem with churn
ultimately is it's easy to gain
i got four different ways plus some
other things i could do to fudge it
so now there are a few bad apples who
survivor bias this
unbelievably public companies actually
do this and what they're effectively
saying is well excluding the customers
who aren't doing business with us
anymore
the cohort almost definitionally
expanded by n percent
right so instead of taking a set of
customers a year ago
and looking at what they're worth today
they do it backwards they take a set of
customers today
and look at what they were worth a year
ago and that's survivor bias because
we've excluded everybody
who's not a customer today so the only
way to gain
that dollar retention rate is the
survivor bias hit uh and sadly some
people do but most people do not
so look the idea of cohorts is not new
virtually every s1
this is data dogs will show by year
the value of cohorts so the purple is
all the customers and acquired in 2013
and how they've evolved over time and
value etc etc
so so look the idea of looking at
cohorts and sas is not
new uh the idea of making this kind of
chart
is not new and this kind of chart is my
mind not only is it not new it's quite
standard
but what is newer is netting this out to
a single number because if you get a
single number you can benchmark it right
it's hard to benchmark this chart
i i can't readily compare it to other
charts i mean i can look at it but
but benchmarks i can do off data
so and by the way net dollar retention
is actually a very popular metric right
so there's martin casado and andreessen
uh in a tweet stream about what metrics
he likes to see it's either on a board
deck or an investor back i can't
remember
uh but you've got net and gross dollar
attention and by the way remember i said
some people to find them inverse of how
i do
he's one of them right so you can see
he's saying that gross
includes churning down cell and net does
not but but in any case so a real
example of where
you know people use those terms in
backwards relative to each other but in
any case
both metrics are important in his mind
and in mine as well
you have alex clayton a great sas
blogger uh who uh has done blog posts
about that dollar retention rate in ipos
uh recently this guy zach kuckoff put a
tweet up showing the net retention of
ipos at
uh of sas tools selling to developers
and you can see snowflake 158 twilio
155. those are really epic
numbers by the way uh elastic 142.
and then finally john ma who i think
writes uh
public comps i think is the name of his
uh newsletter uh you can see
here's what it takes to go public in
2020 the average one had 330 million in
ar
49 revenue growth and 120 net dollar
retention so so this is a popular metric
and i think it is popular for the
reasons we cite it it's it's easy to
understand it's easy to calculate and
it's hard to gain
um so what is a good net dollar
retention rate about 115 right i think
below 100 people that start to get
scared
right because it's saying that your ar
pool kind of decays
by itself it doesn't expand it kind of
if left alone it shrinks
uh and that's not good uh not for
lenders or not for private equity people
or not even for vc people
nobody wants to see the ar pool
shrinking um so so i'd say 100 is a
practical minimum
i think between 100 and 105 it's kind of
considered very
uh 110 is i think kind of the minimum
good
and 116 is median and i think 120 starts
to be very good and
anything much above 120 530 is getting
into the epic
category um
uh i'm going to keep going here so uh
net dollar retention
you know this was kind of an unpleasant
surprise which is i did some
linear regressions and i said hey how
much does net dollar retention
drive sas multiples if it's so important
i bet it's a big driver of sas multiples
and the answer is oops it's not
the r squared is only 0.06 between that
dollar retention
and enterprise value the next 12 months
revenue
so it's not a valuation driver i now
think of it as a
as a financing enabler right okay so a
higher one
isn't necessarily by itself going to
drive a higher valuation
but i could tell you if you don't have a
high enough one you're not going to be
able to raise money
so it's still a super important metric
it just doesn't happen to be
a good driver evaluation like ar growth
is so the r squared between
ar growth and enterprise value multiple
is
0.5 and then rule of 40 which is the
balance of uh revenue growth and
operating profit in effect its
revenue growth minus free cash flow or
plus free cash flow is the rule of 40.
and uh ironically you can see here that
the rule of 40 at one point in time
better explained multiples than growth
than just revenue growth
and now in these kind of frothy times
the the better
predictor of your multiple is just
simply how fast you're going
not how well you're balancing growth in
profit um so that's kind of an
interesting comment on the times because
for a long time the rule of
40 was a better predictor of your
multiple right how well you balance
growth and profit matter more to your
valuation
simply than just how much you're growing
but right now it's kind of just uh
what is it just a full speed ahead grow
as fast as you can
and that's a better predictor of
valuation now to move forward let's
start to wrap this up
uh three pithy quotes to ponder uh
they're all basically saying you know
what gets
measured gets managed and various
correlations and when i was younger i i
i viewed that less skeptically i was
like oh if you want to manage something
you should measure it
uh and now i kind of have a negative
connotation on the word manage which is
like and this is
expressed by uh the economist justin
wolfers down there with goodheart's law
when a measure becomes a target it
ceases to be a good measure
i've actually blogged about this on
pipeline coverage called the
self-fulfilling 3x pipeline coverage
fallacy uh or prophecy the
self-fulfilling prophecy
um so because you kind of ruined the
metric by making it a target because now
everyone's managing the metric and it
kind of loses its predictive value it's
kind of what good hearts law is saying
but but to flip that over uh and to play
the the operator side of this hey if i'm
running a sas business
and i know that ndr matters a lot to my
ability to raise funding if not my
valuation why don't i just build it in
why don't i when i make a contract with
a customer say hey
we think you're going to expand your
usage over time we think you're going to
have a hundred units of usage in year
120 and year two and 140 and year three
and how about i give you a price lock on
those three numbers
and i'll give you a 10 cushion if we
estimate it wrong and you're gonna pay
me those three numbers over the next
three years
and wouldn't that be nice you get price
protection you get some cushion on
expansion
and uh and i get built-in ndr
so right there i have just locked in a
near 20 that dollar expansion rate
right uh i've traded away potentially
some ar now but in my example i actually
didn't
because the usage was naturally
expanding so i didn't really trade away
anything other than the price lock
and it creates this notion of pre-sold
expansion the first time i saw this i
was at a board meeting and there was a
row in the spreadsheet called pre-sold
arr
and i was like what the heck is that and
the answer was
it was this it was the 20k of expansion
in year 2 and the 40k of expansion in
year 3.
uh i did a tweet a while ago about what
do you call this and the consensus
average was initial arr
kind of average ar in this case and then
terminal arr
so look this complicates as we talked
about earlier calculations and sales
comp compilations
but the good news is you're locking an
expansion up front um
and that's great if you're going to get
measured on this metric why not build it
in
there's a very similar thing that is bad
in my opinion which is price ramping
and the difference between the left
column and the right column is in the
right column
the usage and value is not changing over
time all we're doing is tilting the
price
we're actually in effect saying you
really owe me 120k a year
but it's kind of a financing strategy
i'm to tip that line
and uh it will drive on an arr basis
epic net dollar retention
but on a revenue basis asc606 will
flatten it out it will see right through
this trick
and you will just end up with 120k per
year in gaap revenue and
this also has all the downsides of the
left-hand column uh and in my mind it's
playing accounting game so
there's a real shade of gray here guys
between what i think is good and what i
think is bad
but the fact of the matter is if the
usage is actually expanding and you lock
it in that's smart if you're just
tilting the price and it's really a
financing game
it's probably not good so uh to finish
this up the next frontier
is uh i think the next metric we're
going to see private companies start to
look at is now kind of
second billing in public companies rpo
remaining performance obligation it's
the amount of contracted arr you have
under contract that
is not kind of currently either been
billed which is revenue
or been paid in advance which is
deferred revenue so
if you're not releasing rpo there is no
other way to see it
the the only way a company can you can
know a company's rpo is if they tell you
because it does not appear in the
balance sheet people sometimes confuse
deferred revenue with rpo
and they're not the same thing because
it only ends up as deferred revenue
if they've paid you in which case it
ends up in your balance sheet is
liability
so this is not tracked much by private
sas companies
but i think it's the next public company
metric the private company is going to
start to look at either as they get
bigger and start to think about going
public
or just because investors private
company investors are going to want to
know
because the sas company that has booked
a bunch of three-year contracts that
that largely get paid
is arguably worth more than one that
hasn't so
that's remaining performance obligation
let's uh wrap this up here with
takeaways
look a sas company is really the sum of
two businesses a recurring business
and a non-recurring business union
economics are great
but churn can be problematic when this
churn gets polluted it pollutes
downstream metrics the solution to all
this is to zoom out do a court based
analysis to say
how big was the base a year ago how big
is it today that's called net dollar
retention
a good rate is around 115 hey if this
matters so much why don't we just build
it in
so we don't have to make it kind of a
guessing game and then going forward
little preview for the future i think
startups are increasingly going to look
not only at
ndr which is affect the public company
metric but now rpo
so uh thank you all for coming i will
post the slides
and uh you can reach me at my blog or on
twitter at cal blog if you have
further questions again thanks for
coming good luck and
happy expansion
you